OUR ESG STRATEGY
As a responsible bank and company, the Group places professional ethics at the heart of its operating
model. The Group is committed to managing legal, regulatory and ethical risks for the benefit of its
customers, employees and partners. Groupe BPCE thus ensures strict compliance with laws,
regulations and best professional practices in all its companies. This is reflected in a Group Code of
Conduct and Ethics approved by the Supervisory Board in 2018 and a rigorous tax policy with a Tax
Code of Conduct in 2021.
OUR COMMITMENTS ARE MEASURED BY KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Launched by the United Nations, the sustainable development Goals (SDGs), a common language
based on 17 goals broken down into 169 targets, have become the benchmark for measuring the
progress made by governments and private companies. Groupe BPCE strives to fully integrate these
objectives into its business lines or its own operations and contributes directly to the SDGs through
the concrete actions described here.
PARTICIPATION IN SECTORAL WORKING GROUPS
As a cooperative bank committed to serving its cooperative shareholders, at the very heart of the
territories, the entities of Groupe BPCE intend to contribute constructively to public debate by
providing decision-makers and civil society with information on socio-economic changes at regional,
national or international level, as well as on the banking sector and its developments.
Groupe BPCE's objective is to make an active contribution to the debate and to participate as a
stakeholder in a collective, fair and informed decision. Groupe BPCE's interest representation
activities therefore fall strictly within this framework. In terms of interest representation, in addition
to complying with its rules of professional ethics and cooperative values, BPCE applies all the
regulations in force as well as all the codes of ethics to which its public contacts and the various
associations in the marketplace are subject.
In 2023, Public Affairs monitored a number of legislative texts that had an impact on the Group's
business, taking part in various working groups, responding to a number of European public
consultations and drafting Group positions. On certain specific subjects, Public Affairs requested
meetings with members of the French Parliament, the administration, ministerial cabinets and the
various European institutions, either bilaterally or through certain professional associations.
Market positions are mainly taken by professional associations. Groupe BPCE is a member of the
following associations, among others: Fédération Bancaire Française (FBF) in conjunction with
Fédération Bancaire Européenne (FBE), Association Française des Établissements de Crédit et des
Entreprises d'Investissement (AFECEI), Association Française des Banques (AFB), Association
Financière de Gestion (AFG), Paris Europlace, Institut de la Finance Durable (IFD), France Assureurs,
European Savings Banks Group (ESBG), European Association of Cooperative Banks (EACB);
Institute of International Finance (IIF).
At national level
The main French texts on which Groupe BPCE has mobilised its teams are the following:
• Bill tabled on October 11th, 2022 to improve banking accessibility and inclusion: this bill aims
to improve banking accessibility to ensure that a cash withdrawal system is maintained
throughout the country, and to improve banking inclusion by improving current
arrangements for the most vulnerable. It also strengthens the current framework for
vulnerable customers. It provides for better information for financially vulnerable people on
the measures available to them, the introduction of 'sub-ceilings' for bank intervention fees
for customers of the specific offer, and explicit mention in the law of the possibility for customers who have taken out the specific offer to benefit from an overdraft authorisation.
This bill was amended by the senators on first reading and adopted on May 3rd, 2023. Groupe
BPCE has organised meetings with the FBF;
• Green Industry bill: Parliament definitively passed the bill in October 2023. Aimed at reindustrialising
France through green industries, the bill's stated objective is to raise industry's
share of GDP from 10% to 15%, with the main measures being to reduce taxation on capital,
simplify procedures, focus on training, create a Plan d'épargne avenir climat (PEAC) and
introduce a green industry tax credit. The creation of the PEAC would make it possible to
mobilise long-term savings for the transition, within an attractive tax framework. In addition,
article 15 on financing the ecological transition requires life insurance policies to list units of
account that have obtained a government-recognised label for financing the energy and
ecological transition or for socially responsible investment. Groupe BPCE was interviewed by
the parliamentary mission. This text has mobilised the institutions and the French Banking
Federation mainly on the characteristics of the PEAC;
• Bill concerning the 2024 Olympic and Paralympic Games: Groupe BPCE has followed this text
as a Premium Partner of the 2024 Olympic Games. The legislative and regulatory framework
designed to meet the constraints of organising major events has undergone significant
changes. An initial law relating to the organisation of the Olympic Games was adopted in
2018. It included measures designed to meet the constraints specific to the preparation of
an event of this scale. The main provisions of the law concerned security, land-use planning
for host cities and adaptations in terms of healthcare provision and first-aid training. BPCE
followed the provisions relating to land use planning in host cities, and more specifically the
measures affecting the display of partner advertising.
As part of its work as part of the working group of the Climate Commission of the Fédération des
Banques Françaises (FBF), chaired by the Chairman of the Board of Directors of Groupe BPCE, the
Group participates in dialogues and discussions on:
• non-financial reporting requirements: Green Asset Ratio, Pillar 3 (EBA reporting), TNFD
(Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures);
• work to promote the transition of banks' portfolios, favouring that of businesses and seeking
to reduce as far as possible the administrative requirements for small and medium-sized
enterprises;
• a review of the various existing methodologies for developing a biodiversity footprint and,
ultimately, a common methodology.
At European level
The main European texts on which Groupe BPCE has mobilised its teams are the following:
• the transposition of Basel IV, in particular through the CRD6 regulation, which aims to further
harmonise regulation in Europe: the text reviews in depth the capital requirements to cover
the risks linked to banks' commitments, broadens the list of supervisory powers and the
powers of sanction of supervisors, introduces a new prudential regime applicable to branches
in third countries and integrates ESG risks to a greater extent, in particular environmental
risk;
• FIDAR (Financial Data Access Regulation), proposed on June 28th, 2023 by the Commission:
the aim of this new regulation is to extend the obligations to share payment data to all
financial data (banks, insurance companies, asset managers), in order to promote the
establishment of a common financial data area in the European Union. The text thus
establishes rights and obligations in the area of financial services on access to and re-use of
data; CSDDD (Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive): on February 23rd, 2022, the
European Commission published a proposal for a directive on corporate sustainability due
diligence, aimed at promoting sustainable and responsible business behaviour along global
value chains. This directive still has to be examined by the European Parliament and the
Council before being adopted and implemented. If adopted, it will require European
companies with more than 250 employees and a turnover of €40m to publish information on
localised sustainability risks, including within their service providers and suppliers.
Companies would also be obliged to carry out a certain amount of due diligence to ensure
that both their suppliers and their customers behave in a sustainable and responsible
manner;
• SFDR (Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation): the aim of this European regulation is to
harmonise and strengthen the transparency obligations applicable to players marketing or
advising on certain financial products, thereby making it easier for investors to distinguish
and compare the many sustainable investment strategies currently available in the European
Union. The EU SFDR Regulation requires asset managers and investment advisers to publish
specific information on how they address two key considerations: sustainability risks and key
adverse impacts. As far as management companies are concerned, the SFDR regulation also
requires them to make transparent remuneration policies that take account of the integration
of sustainability risks. In addition, it aims to help investors choose between different products
by imposing increasing levels of information, depending on the extent to which sustainable
development is taken into account;
• CSRD (Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive): this European directive, which comes
into force on January 1st, 2024, aims to harmonise companies' sustainability reporting and
improve the availability and quality of public data. A large number of companies will have to
follow mandatory European sustainability reporting standards and publish detailed
information on their risks, opportunities and material impacts in relation to social,
environmental and governance issues. The CSRD will gradually cover almost 50,000
companies. The first companies subject to the CSRD will publish their first sustainability
reports in 2025 (based on 2024). A first set of twelve standards (applicable to companies in
all sectors), covering all ESG issues, was adopted on July 31st, 2023 by the European
Commission. Sector-specific standards will follow, along with specific standards for SMEs
listed on regulated markets;
• ESG ratings: on June 13th, 2023, the Commission presented a proposal for a regulation on
the transparency and integrity of ESG rating activities, as part of its renewed sustainable
finance strategy, launched in 2021. The proposal aims to improve the reliability,
comparability and transparency of ESG ratings. More specifically, it aims to improve the
quality of information on ESG ratings, by improving the transparency of the characteristics
and methodologies of ESG ratings, and by ensuring greater clarity on the operations of ESG
rating providers and the prevention of risks of conflicts of interest at the level of ESG rating
providers.
Natixis' Green Sustainable Hub (GSH) is also an active contributor to various European trade
associations.
Groupe BPCE, convinced of the fundamental importance of the energy transition of the economy, is
committed to the Institut de la Finance Durable (IFD), created in January 2023. The Chairman of the
Management Board of Groupe BPCE has joined the Board of Directors of the new Institut de la Finance
Durable (IFD), whose mission is to accelerate action by the Paris financial centre to achieve the
environmental energy transition, resulting from the transformation of Finance for Tomorrow, the
branch of Paris Europlace.GOVERNANCE TAKING ESG ISSUES TO THE HIGHEST LEVEL
GOVERNANCE THAT DEFINES AND IMPLEMENTS THE MAJOR STRATEGIC CSR GUIDELINES
The Supervisory Board validates, supervises and puts the Group’s ESG strategy into perspective. The
Chairman of the Board of Directors and the Management Board draw up the ESG strategy, ensure
its implementation and supervise the Group’s risk management.
MAIN BODIES DEALING WITH ESG STRATEGY AND RISKS
CSR steering and governance system
The Impact Department, which reports directly to the Chairman of the Board of Directors, proposes,
approves and implements the Group's ESG strategy. Its main tasks are to:
• define and steer the Group's ambitions and the implementation of sectoral policies in terms
of sustainable finance: it ensures the progressive alignment of Groupe BPCE's portfolios
towards a Net Zero trajectory, in accordance with the commitments made within the
framework of BPCE 2024, and in particular by following the guidelines defined by the Net
Zero Banking Alliance (NZBA);
• coordinate the definition and implementation of methodologies used in the context of
sustainable finance;
• identify new regulatory requirements in the area of sustainable finance and support their
implementation.
The Impact Department provides the Group's ESG expertise and is the guarantor of Sustainable
Finance standards and methodologies. In 2022, it set up a Sustainable Finance Centre, staffed by
experts, whose remit is to propose sustainable finance initiatives to the Group's businesses, oversee
their implementation in the various business lines and define the associated measurement tools,
standards and policies.
ESG issues are monitored and taken into account in each business line's roadmap as part of a
governance and steering system for all projects relating to the Group's ESG issues. Led by the Impact
Department, this system makes it possible to:
• regularly monitor the progress of the various projects by the Management Board and the
Supervisory Board;
• check the consistency of the approaches, methodologies and data used by the Group's
various business lines.
These projects are being carried out in close association with the teams in the various business lines.
They include:
• work on measuring the carbon footprint of portfolios and aligning them with a Net Zero
trajectory;
• the deployment of offerings, tools and partnerships to provide customers with the best
possible support in meeting their own transition challenges;
• initiatives to reduce the Group's direct environmental footprint (digital, real estate,
purchasing, etc.);
• the integration of ESG criteria into risk management;
• the implementation of new regulatory requirements (Taxonomy, EBA Pillar III, SFDR, MiFID
II, etc.); employee training;
• the "ESG data & technologies" project, at the junction of most of the previous projects, with
the aim of collecting, standardising and distributing the ESG data required for these different
uses throughout the Group's information systems.
The Impact Department is committed to promoting the Group's visibility to all stakeholders on all
ESG issues and to ensuring that the Group is up to date with the forthcoming regulatory deadlines
relating to ESG in general and sustainable finance in particular.
To carry out its tasks, it relies on the CSR Departments of the Group's various business lines, the
Fédération Nationale des Banques Populaires (FNBP), the Fédération Nationale des Caisses d'Epargne
(FNCE) and the CSR Departments of the Group's entities, comprising more than 300 correspondents.
Contribution of ESG performance to the remuneration of Groupe BPCE executives
The Supervisory Board, through its Remuneration Committee, is responsible for setting the method
and amount of remuneration for each member of the Board of Directors. It ensures that CSR issues
are fully integrated into the remuneration policy.
The remuneration of the Chairman of the Board of Directors and of the members of BPCE's
Management Board includes an annual variable component, 40% of which is indexed to qualitative
criteria, of which 10%, as from the 2021 financial year, is based on the achievement of CSR-related
criteria. The allocation of this variable component depends in part on the implementation of the
Group's strategic ambitions on environmental issues (including climate issues). ; voici un texte que je dois comparer avec un autre test sur l'ESG 
